1       EAST AFRICA UNIVERSITY  GAROWE CAMPUS RESEARCH AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT CENTER   GUIDELINES FOR STUDENTS RESEARCH PROJECT WRITING For Supervisors and Students       Luqman Yasin Gelle Head  Research & Professional Development Center East Africa University, Garowe University     April, 2020  
2  Introduction East Africa University has adopted the following research format and guidelines to ensure that researches are conducted effectively and thesis is presented in one standard format in terms of parts, typing, pagination and technicalities. The following guidelines are to be adhered to by students and research supervisors of East Africa University. relevant procedures and policies and also the roles and responsibilities of students and supervisors during the process of university research dissertation.  Typing Technicalities 1. A4 size  2. Computer printed materials must be of good quality 3. Font = Times New Roman  4. Font Size = 12 5. Margins = 1.5 inches spacing from top, bottom, left and right sides 6. Type with 1.5 inches spacing 7. Double space from one heading to the next heading  Pagination 1. Number of pages should be consecutively in Latin starting with the first page of Chapter One 2. Numbers should appear in the center of the lower/bottom margin of the page 3. Preliminary pages before the first page of Chapter One should be numbered using small Roman numerals, still at the bottom and centered.  Style Guide Technicalities 1. informal presentations. 2. Never start a sentence with a figure. Spell out figures in words. 3. Delete redundancies in words, sentences or in statements 4. Title should not exceed 20 words; all capital letters (except for scientific names); in bold and inverted pyramid. 
3  5. Side headings; in bold, only the beginning letter is capitalized. 6. Avoid one sentence paragraph all over the text.  Parts of the Research Proposal  Preliminary Pages (Title page, Table of contents)  Chapter One  Introduction (Background of the Study, Statement of the Problem, General objective of the study, Specific objectives, Research Objectives, Conceptual Framework, Scope of the study, Significance of the study, Expected Limitations of the study)  Chapter Two  Literature Review (Overview of concepts, Review of Specific objectives of the study, Research Gap)  Chapter Three  Research Methodology (Research Design, Study Population, Sample Size, Sampling technique, Instruments of data collection, Data analysis tools, Research Ethics )  References  Appendices  o Appendix I  Research Instrument   Take Note: The length of the proposal should not exceed 30 pages including the references.  Parts of the Final Thesis / Research Report  Preliminary pages - (Title page, Declaration, Approval Page, Dedication, Acknowledgement, Abstract, Table of Contents, List of Tables, List of Figures)  Chapter One  Introduction (Background of the Study, Statement of the Problem, General objective of the study, Specific objectives, Research Objectives, Conceptual Framework, Scope of the study, Significance of the study, Expected Limitations of the study)  Chapter Two  Literature Review (Overview of concepts, Review of Specific objectives of the study, Research Gap) 
4   Chapter Three  Research Methodology (Research Design, Study Population, Sample Size, Sampling technique, Instruments of data collection, Data analysis tools, Research Ethics )  Chapter Four  Data Presentation, Analysis and Discussion of Findings (Introduction, Demographic characteristics of respondents, Objective One, Objective Two and Objective Three)  Chapter Five - Conclusions and Recommendations  References  Appendices  o Appendix II  Research Instrument                 
5  The Structure of the Research Project  PRELIMINARY PAGES Title of the Study     The title of the study refers to the heading which should provide a single line description of the study and thereby portrays a quick summary of the key idea(s) in the research project. In many cases, the title of the study should indicate the respondents, independent and dependent variables. Remember, your title should contain between 5-20 words. It should be brief and clear. Example: Graduate Unemployment in Somalia: Causes, Socio-economic Consequences and Possible Solutions.  Declaration  In this page you declare that your work as a researcher is original and has not been submitted to any academic institution for any academic award. Approval The approval page is the second page in your document. There should only be one page of approval for the supervisor, neither for the Research Directorate nor for the Faculty Dean. You supervisor should sign after ensuring that your research meets with the required research standards.  Dedication  This is where you can show your love and gratitude to the people who have helped you to achieve your goals. This part tends to be less prescribed than other sections, so you have a little freedom to get creative in the way you express yourself! Acknowledgement  The acknowledgment is a paragraph which thanks everyone who has helped you whilst you have been researching and writing your report. This may be your supervisor or any other academic staff who have provided guidance and support; other students or colleagues that you've collaborated with; 
6  interviewees; librarians; external bodies who have given you assistance. Table of contents    A table of contents makes it easy for you and reader to quickly navigate to a section of your document. Each item in your table of contents links to the titled sections of your document that use the heading styles.   Abstract   The abstract should, in the briefest terms possible, describe the topic, the scope, methodology, the principal findings, the conclusions and main recommendations. It should be written last to reflect accurately the content of the report and should be only one page.   A primary objective of an abstract is to communicate to the reader the essence of the paper. The reader will then be the judge of whether to read the full report or not.   List of tables and figures   Indicate the table and figures that you have used in your document.   Remember that long tables should be placed in the appendix section. Table numbering must be consecutive within chapters. For example, the first table under Chapter Four could be numbered as Table 4.1 and the second one as Table 4.2.  All figures should be written in full to describe what they are saying. For consistency purposes, they should be numbered and labelled in the same way as tables, with their sources and all other elaborations placed at the bottom of the respective figures. Unless the figures are big enough to deserve separate pages by themselves, they must be included in the text.   
7   List of abbreviations    Indicate abbreviations that you have used.  In the main text, the subject should be stated in full followed by the abbreviation or acronyms placed in brackets the first time it appears. Example: Federal Government of Somalia (FGS), in subsequent citations only the abbreviation FGS should be used.   CHAPTER ONE - INTRODUCTION Background to the study    This is a critical part of the research because the setting or the position of the study is established and brief overview of the problem the researcher aspires to tackle is introduced. It is suggested to start from the global perspective to your study area by indicating your problem as you go writing your background.    The role of the background of the study include, to clarify what has brought about the need for the study; point out the challenges faced due to the identified issues; indicate the opportunities for improvement and demonstrate the section tries to convince the readers that the problem or opportunity exists and that is should be addressed and show the readers that the researcher knows the study area as he/she is familiar with what has preceded      Statement of the problem    The research problem is an issue or concern that puzzles the researcher due to its effects or inconsistence despite the measures taken. This is the heart of the research. Normally a paragraph or a few paragraphs, is all that is required to 
8  describe exactly what the problem is. Many students have difficulty in describing the problem: instead they list the objectives, outcomes, needs or other irrelevant aspects. A good statement of the problem provides direction to the research and indicates the demarcation of the study.  Consider your variables when you are explaining your problem. In this case, it is important to indicate clearly that there is a problem i.e. dilemma  needs to be solved, or a gap of knowledge to be filled.   Objectives of the study     These are finer and specific statements that originate from the research problem i.e. the research variables. They are the goal you set to attain in your study. There are two kinds of objectives of the research    General objective and    Specific objectives of the study (maximum three).   In writing General Objective of the study, you are referring to the title of the study.  General Objective states what researchers expect to achieve by the study in general terms.   Your main variables will help you to construct Specific Objectives. These are smaller, logically connected parts of general objective i.e. specific aspects of the topic that we want to study within the framework of our study.  It is important to note that each specific objective should contain only one aspect of the Study. The wording should clearly, completely and specifically. State the objectives using investigate, analyze, explore, assess, compare, measure, identify and -
9  e.g. understand, to know, appreciate, learn etc.     Research hypothesis or research questions     Hypotheses are guiding predictions of the outcome of the study. If you state hypotheses, indicate whether they null or alternative hypotheses.    A research question is a way of formulating a problem so that you are directed to the answers. You draw research questions from your specific objectives. A research question is not the same as a question which you could ask an individual who might be part of your investigation. Your research question is the most critical part of your research proposal -- it defines the proposal, it guides your arguments and inquiry, and it provokes the interests of the reviewer.    Conceptual framework This is a research tool intended to assist a researcher to develop awareness and understanding of the situation under scrutiny and to communicate the research problem. It explains the relationship among the interlinked concepts/ variables.   Scope of the study   The research should indicate the boundaries or limits of the study in terms of contents, sample, area/geographical or period. This is due to limited resources and help to concentrate on important matters i.e. avoids unnecessary diversions. It can be done under one heading or separated into categories of content, geographical location and period. Significance of the study   This part is significant as it shows the importance of the study when completed, indicate the beneficiaries and how are they 
10   going to benefit from the study. You present significance can be in terms of:   The contribution to the existing knowledge   Contribution to new methods of applying or using a certain application tool   Managerial implication as a result of not solving the problem at hand   Benefits to be accrued to the individuals, organization, society or the country at large  Fulfilling academic requirements .e.g. degree   Ironing out policy implication or areas requiring more attention by policy makers  Streamlining areas for further research   It is preferred to use the conjunction of may or might instead of will to provide of a benefit of doubt on the applicability of the outcomes.   CHAPTER TWO  LITERATURE REVIEW   An adequate literature review is required in all research projects, since it is an account of what has been published on the topic by accredited scholars and researchers. It is important for supervisors to request students to read at least 15-25 books/articles relevant to the problem during research writing. The literature review is a material part of the research process and it takes a significant amount of time and energy, thus the researcher should be much focused.   Overview of Concepts or related theories  The researcher needs to indicate different definitions and concepts that are related to the study. This helps both the researcher and the readers to gain an in-depth understanding 
11  of the research problem.  You may adopt a theoretical framework that will guide the study. Sometimes you may present a number of theories, but need to specify which is most applicable to your study.    Review of specific objectives of the study.   The supervisors should guide students on how to undertake a review by emphasizing that the review must relate to research problem by addressing the objectives of the study. Thus, students must identify variables in research objective and find their information     Research Gap  The review should help to come up with knowledge gap; an area that has not yet covered,  your study wants to add the knowledge in terms of methodologies; theories to be adopted, study area etc.   Chapter Three: Research Methodology  This is a critical part in the proposal whereby the science of research is presented.  That is, it shows how the study will be conducted. Thus, it is the framework within which research is undertaken.  Research design   Indicate which design will you adopt and why i.e. its link to your problem. You should justify why a particular research design has been chosen.  Study Population  Any research that is conducted targets particular people who are affected/influenced by the research problem. You should understand the people whom do you target for your study. You 
12  also need to identify the particulars of those people and the number you will take for your study.  Sample Size It is evident that you cannot use the whole sum of population for your study. So choosing a sample to be a representative is recommended. You should boldly indicate how you choose your sample and why. Data collection technique  You need to indicate the types of data that you need to collect for your study, be secondary or primary data.    Data collection Instrument    The researcher is supposed to indicate the tools/technique that you will adopt and give reasons for the adoption of a particular tool/ techniques; for whom and which data will you collect. Data presentation and analysis   Once you have collected your data, you need to specify the way you will present and analyze the data. In other words, you need to come up with an analytical frame / model for your data. You need to desegregate your data to make your analysis simpler. To date, there is computer software that simplifies data presentation and analysis you may indicate the type of software you will use.   Based on the type of data you need to indicate an analysis technique will you adopt for your study. Qualitative analysis techniques include thematic or content analysis; discourse analysis etc. Quantitative analysis techniques include Descriptive Statistics (Means, Std. Deviations, and Correlations), T-tests and Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), Regression   
13  Research Ethics    You need to indicate how you will observe research during research process e.g. during data collection, analysis and reporting.   RESEARCH REPORT WRITING Once the researcher has completed the research proposal and collected the data, the next step is to write reports of the findings. In this case, research report becomes a part of research report writing after making few adjustments such as language from future to past simple. The report will incorporate proposal parts plus chapter four and five.   CHAPTER FOUR: DATA PRESENTATION, ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS  The crux of the report is the analysis and interpretation of the results. What do the results mean? How do they relate to the objectives of the project? To what extent have they resolved the problem?   In this section, relevant data, observations, and findings are summarized and analysed. Tabulation of data, equations, charts, and figures can be used effectively to present results clearly and concisely. You have to observe the followings:   Present your  general information such as response rate, profile of respondents (Socio- Demographic Characteristics)  Refer to your research objectives represent your analysis of the collected data (Present objective by objective)  Link your analysis with literature review either to confirm or not (incorporate this with in the text of the analysis)  
14  CHAPTER FIVE: CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS   You have to make a conclusion for your study findings i.e.  You deduce major issue from your findings as per your objectives. Based on findings, provide recommendations; what to be done?   Perform your conclusions and recommendations objective by objective to provide target references.   Finally, Indicate areas for further studies.   Referencing Referencing acknowledges the sources that you use to write your proposal and report. Academics use various reference systems, which have minor differences here and there. We adopt the APA Referencing Style. The system requires only two elements, an in-text reference, and a single integrated reference at the end of the report. In-text citations are used throughout your writing to acknowledge the sources of your information. demic sin that is Plagiarism.       END  











